Project Details

Aim

KStars is a wonderful Desktop Planetarium and it serves as a very useful tool
for Amateur Astronomers. But it currently lacks a good, versatile observation
planner.  I propose to create an observation planner for KStars to make it a
better software and hopefully increase the user base.


Motivation

The current version of KStars falls behind other professional and commercially
available software when it comes to tools for planning observing programmes.
Implementing such features in KStars would result in a significant rise in the
user base, and would also provide a good FOSS alternative for the Amateur
Astronomer.

Being an amateur astronomer myself, I find KStars as an wonderful utility to
help relish the beauty of the night sky. I find KStars as a good FOSS utility
for locating celestial objects in observation sessions.  I got into the FOSS
world and resumed coding because of KStars and I want to do more than just a
return of favour to it. Since I use KStars for observation I would love to have
this tool implemented. I am also a part of the Astronomy Club, IIT Madras
(http://www.astro.iitm.ac.in/Home/) and I would like to use KStars to aid
learning astronomy and I wish to conduct well planned observation/Astro
Photography sessions which gives me further reason to take up this project.


Main features of the Planner

	+ Create a new tool called the Observation Planner with different modes
( Something similar to a tabbed version ) for Observation and Planning. ( The
planning section will have features like Find Object, Whats Up tonight, etc.
embedded in it and the Observation mode provides a quick reference for details
about the objects in the list, gives previews, etc.)
	+ Create an Observation List/Modify the existing list and make it
usable.  ( Plus integration with whats up tonight and provide an option in the
right click menu on any object. Also provide an option in the Find Object Dialog
box to add the object directly to the list )
	+ Show all the information available for objects in the list ( Like
Altitude-Azimuth, RA-Dec Coordinates, Magnitude, Object type, etc.)
	+ Provide options to filter/sort objects on the list using these
parameters ( For example Sorting the objects based on their rising and setting
time )
	+ Create a new format for the observation logs (like COMAST XML
Schema), provide options for observation notes ( Options like User comments,
Equipment used, Transparency, User rating)
	+ Integrate within the tool many features like Find object, FOV editor,
Sky Calendar (In the process, improve the sky calendar by adding legends, etc. )
, Altitude versus Time tool, DSS/SDSS image tool, Provide options to get more
details about the selected object(s) from the Internet.
	+ Provide a nice user interface for using the tool effectively/ Make it
really simple and usable.
	+ With INDI support, provide options for slewing to the selected
object.

Plus if time permits	

	+ Integration with KOrganizer to provide reminders the user about the
objects set in the observing list.
	+ Provide options to help the user in navigating to the desired object
by giving directions using nearby (relatively Bright) objects.
	+ If the project on "Community Integration" is completed, provide
options to directly share the Observation list and the Observation logs.
	+ Documentation of the project.


A Tentative Time line for the Project

	+ Till around May 2 ( That is till the End Semester Exams get over ) get
familiar with the codebase of KStars and try creating a sample Interface.

	+ Target 1 : ( 3 weeks ) 
	- Revamp the present Observing list and Create the Interface for the
	  Observation Planner with the basic information displayed.
	- Implement the Add to list option in the Find object dialog box, Right
	  click menu and in the What's up tonight dialog.
	- Create the filter and sort options in the Planner interface.
	
	+ Target 2 : ( 1 week ) 
	- Implement the new format for Observation logs
	
	+ Target 3 : ( 3.5 weeks )
	- Embed tools like Altitude vs Time, Sky Calendar, DSS/SDSS image and
	  Sky Calendar within the interface.
	- Go to the respective tools when clicked on the Previews
	
	+ Target 4 : ( 1 week )
	- Integrate the Observation planner with INDI support, if a telescope is
	  connected, display the current position of the telescope, provide the
	  options for slewing to any object in the list.
	
Total = 8.5 weeks.

And the remaining time will be spent in cleaning up of code, Bug fixing, etc.
If there is more time, try and implement the navigation helper and complete the
documentation.

	
Expected Outcome

The expected outcome of this project is to have a versatile observation
planner, like the commercially available 'AstroPlanner' (
http://www.ilangainc.com/astroplanner/index.shtml ) This is probably what
KStars needs at the moment, because the other alternative mentioned above is
really useful and hence is very popular amongst amateur astronomers. 


Vitals

Name		: Prakash Mohan
Email Address	: prak902000@gmail.com
IRC Nick	: praksh or DrHolmes
Location	: Chennai, India

About Me

My name is Prakash Mohan, I am a second year undergraduate student in the
Department of Aerospace engineering at the Indian Institute of Technology
Madras (IITM). 

I started coding in my 8th class and have built a nice taste for programming in
general. I am an amateur astronomer and use KStars for aiding in my observation
for locating celestial objects, conjunctions, etc. KStars really got me into
the world of development and I've been wanting to do something BIG for it,
hence I'd really like to work on it this summer. I believe participating in
this project will encourage me to contribute regularly and become a part of the
KDE community, besides teaching me loads.  I started contributing to KStars
about a year back and I've submitted quite a few Bug fixes and Patches ( listed
in the contributions section ). I'm a member of the kstars-devel mailing list
and keep track of the discussions on the same.  Because of my involvement with
these bug fixes, I am quite familiar with some of the classes used in the
KStars code and the inheritance hierarchy.

I have a good knowledge of C ++, and a coding experience of about 6 years,
during which I learnt debugging and code organization skills. My keen interest
in computers led me into the world of programming and I started with coding for
small Games like Snake, and have done a project where I implemented a Program
for chess. Recently I wrote a code for solving complex chemical equilibria and
am hoping to implement it somewhere in kdeedu.

I currently use only FOSS and am enthusiastic about evangelizing, promoting and
contributing to FOSS. I usually spend some time every week to build KDE trunk
and try and report any bugs that I find during the build, so am quite
comfortable with the build processes. I also participate in the discussions of
the #kde-devel channel in freenode IRC.

I've participated in a KDE hackfest that happened in our college's technical
festival, and also conducted an Amateur Astronomy workshop in the same where, I
showcased some salient features in KStars and promoted contribution and usage
of FOSS in general. I've also attended the talk on KStars by its current
maintainer Akarsh Simha, in the previous year's Fossconf at India.


Contributions to KDE / KStars:

Bug Reports : I've reported on a few bugs before KDE 4.1 and 4.2 releases in
the IRC channels and in Bugzilla.

Patch to Plasma : 

	+ Patch fixing a build error due to change from ImageEffects to
PaintUtils.  (SVN commit 827887)

Patches to KStars :

	+ Patch to make the Find dialog more flexible, spaces can be omitted
when searching for M/NGC/IC objects.  (SVN commit 829313)
	+ Patch to avoid showing unnamed stars when the user searches for white
space.  (SVN commit 832959)
	+ Patch to the conjunctions tool to object if both objects selected are
the same (SVN commit 867188)
	+ Patch making the dates explicit next to the moon rise and set times.
(SVN commit 925493)
	+ Patch fixing a wrong i18np call in the What's up tonight dialog.  
(SVN commit 923013)
	+ Patch implementing a fixme, making a label more intuitive.
(SVN commit 943208)
    + Patch removing a ugly i18n argument missing error message. 
(SVN commit 944978)
